Readme update (#179)
trailofbits/vast: README.md

[![Build & Test](https://github.com/trailofbits/vast/actions/workflows/build.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/trailofbits/vast/actions/workflows/build.yml)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-Apache_2.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/Apache-2.0)

# VAST: MLIR for Program Analysis

VAST is a library for program analysis and instrumentation of C/C++ and related
languages. The goal of this tool is to provide a foundation for customizable
program representation for a broad spectrum of analyses. Using the MLIR

> infrastructure, VAST provides a toolset to represent C/C++ at various stages of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
infrastructure, VAST provides a toolset to represent C/C++ program at various stages of
```

the compilation and to transform the representation to the best-fit program
abstraction.

Whether static or dynamic, the program analysis often requires a specific view

> of the source code. The usual requirements for the representation are to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the source code. The usual requirements for a representation is to be
```

easily analyzable, i.e., have a reasonably small set of operations, be truthful
to the semantics of the analyzed program, and the analysis must be relatable to

> the source. It is also beneficial to access the source at various abstraction

Reviewer: Bullet points maybe?

levels.

The current state-of-the-art tools leverage compiler infrastructures to perform
program analysis. This approach is beneficial because it remains truthful to the
executed program semantics, whether AST or LLVM IR. However, these

> representations come at a cost that they are designed for optimization and code

Reviewer: Maybe?
```suggestion
representations come at a cost as they are designed for optimization and code
```

generation.

The Clang AST is unoptimized and too complex for interpretation-based analysis.
Also, it lacks program features that Clang inserts during LLVM codegen. On the
other hand, LLVM is often too low-level and hardly relatable to high-level
program constructs.

We plan to design a compiler frontend in VAST with program analysis in mind. To
be specific, VAST will represent the compilation process as a tower of IRs in
multiple MLIR dialects. The MLIR allows us to capture high-level features from
AST and interleave them with low-level dialects.

## A Tower of IRs

The feature that differentiates our approach is that the program representation
can hold multiple representations simultaneously, the so-called `tower of IRs`.
One can imagine the tower as multiple MLIR modules side-by-side in various
dialects. Each layer of the tower represents a specific stage of compilation. At
the top is a high-level dialect relatable to AST, and at the bottom is a
low-level LLVM-like dialect. Layers are interlinked with location information.
Higher layers can also be seen as metadata for lower layers.

This feature simplifies analysis build on top of VAST IR in multiple ways. It

> naturally provides __provenance__ to source and higher levels of representation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
naturally provides __provenance__ to higher levels dialects (and source code)
```
Not sure, this was reading as source and then higher levels as source code whereas I think? it was meant as the dialects between AST and LLVM.

from the low levels. Similarly, one can reach for low-level representation from
the high-level source view. This can have multiple utilizations.  One of them is
relating analysis results to the source. For a user, it is invaluable to
represent results in the language of what they see, that is, the high-level
representation of the source. For example, using provenance, one can link the
values in low-level registers to variable names in the source.  Furthermore,
this streamlines communication from the user to the analysis backend and back in
the interactive tools and also allows the automatic analysis to query the
best-fit representation at any time.

The provenance is invaluable for static analysis too. It is often advantageous
to perform analysis as an abstract interpretation of the low-level
representation and relate it to high-level constructs. For example, when trying
to infer properties about control flow, like loop invariants, one can examine
high-level operations and relate the results to low-level analysis using
provenance links.

> We expect to provide a DSL library for design own program representation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We expect to provide a DSL library for design of custom program representation
```

hl.func external @loop_simple () -> !hl.void {
    %0 = hl.var "i" : !hl.lvalue<!hl.int> = {
      %1 = hl.const #hl.integer<0> : !hl.int
      hl.value.yield %1 : !hl.int
    }
    hl.for {
      %1 = hl.ref %0 : !hl.lvalue<!hl.int>
      %2 = hl.implicit_cast %1 LValueToRValue : !hl.lvalue<!hl.int> -> !hl.int
      %3 = hl.const #hl.integer<100> : !hl.int
      %4 = hl.cmp slt %2, %3 : !hl.int, !hl.int -> !hl.int
      hl.cond.yield %4 : !hl.int
    } incr {
      %1 = hl.ref %0 : !hl.lvalue<!hl.int>
      %2 = hl.post.inc %1 : !hl.lvalue<!hl.int> -> !hl.int
    } do {
    }
    hl.return
}
</pre>
</td>
</tr>
</table>

For example high-level control flow with standard types:

```
hl.func external  private @loop_simple() -> none {
    %0 = hl.var "i" : i32 = {
      %1 = hl.const #hl.integer<0> : i32
      hl.value.yield %1 : i32
    }
    hl.for {
      %1 = hl.ref %0 : i32
      %2 = hl.implicit_cast %1 LValueToRValue : i32 -> i32
      %3 = hl.const #hl.integer<100> : i32
      %4 = hl.cmp slt %2, %3 : i32, i32 -> i32
      hl.cond.yield %4 : i32
    } incr {
      %1 = hl.ref %0 : i32
      %2 = hl.post.inc %1 : i32 -> i32
    } do {
    }
    hl.return
}
```

> Types are lowered according to data-layout embeded into VAST module:

Reviewer: Maybe mention that by default these can be derived from clang AST context?
